---
date: 2013-01-27 20:57:14
title: VirtualHostX 4.0 is Coming Soon
layout: post
permalink: /blog/2013/01/virtualhostx-4-coming-soon/index.html
slug: virtualhostx-4-coming-soon
---

Over the weekend you may have noticed that VirtualHostX 4.0 was briefly available for about twenty-four hours. I was crazy excited to release this major new update, but (thanks to a few eagle-eyed users) I quickly found a showstopping bug that caused the app to become unresponsive in certain situations. Rather than leave a buggy product in the hands of users, I decided it was best to roll everything back and put back up version 3.0.

As a developer (especially in a one-person company), a situation like this one is my ultimate nightmare. Bugs always slip through and I do my best to find and fix them in a timely manner. But never before have I had to actually pull a release off the website. I'm more than a little embarrased and definitely humbled. My sincere apologies to users who got bit by this bug and lost time dealing with my mistake.

I hope to have version 4 and all its new features available in the next week or two. Until then, for those of you who already upgraded to version 4, here are [instructions to roll back your data to version 3.0](http://support.clickontyler.com/a/36/downgrade-vhx3/).

For those of you new to VirtualHostX, let me assure you things usually run more smoothly than this :-) And if you're thinking about purchasing, there's no need to wait for the new version. If you buy today, you'll get a free upgrade to version 4 when it's available.